CSS `font` semi-shorthand property (#44387)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/reference/properties/font/index.md

}
```

As with any shorthand property, any individual value that is not specified is set to its corresponding initial value (possibly overriding values previously set using non-shorthand properties). Though not directly settable by `font`, the longhands {{cssxref("font-size-adjust")}} and {{cssxref("font-kerning")}} are also reset to their initial values.

## Constituent properties

This property is a shorthand for the following CSS properties:

- {{cssxref("font-family")}}
- {{cssxref("font-size")}}

> - {{cssxref("font-stretch")}}

Reviewer: Should `font-stretch` be deleted? It is listed here: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-fonts/#font-variant-css21-values:~:text=Set%20Explicitly

Author: It is a legacy term, and now just an alias. I could add `(or it's legacy alias font-stretch)` to the width, but i prefer not to. i'll add it as a suggestion which you can merge if you think it necessary.

> - {{cssxref("font-width")}}

Author: Feel free to commit this if you think it's necessary.

```suggestion
- {{cssxref("font-width")}} (or it's legacy alias {{cssxref("font-stretch")}})
```

```css-nolint
/* font-size font-family */
font: 1.2em sans-serif;

/* font-size/line-height font-family */
font: 1.2em/2 "Fira Sans", sans-serif;

/* font-style font-weight font-size font-family */
font: italic bold 1.2em monospace;

/* font-width font-variant font-size font-family */
font: ultra-condensed small-caps 1.2em Montserrat, Helvetica, sans-serif;

/* system font */
font: caption;
```

### Values

The value is either a shorthand specifying the various font-related properties or a single `<system-font-family-name>` keyword:

- `<'font-style'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-style")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<font-variant-css2>`
  - : Either the `normal` or `small-caps` value of the {{cssxref("font-variant")}} property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<'font-weight'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-weight")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<font-width-css3>`

>   - : The keywords supported by the legacy `font-stretch` property. See the {{cssxref("font-width")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.

Reviewer: I can see why you've done this, but it is confusing. Linking to `font-width` looks like a typo or a mistake. Since the keywords are exactly the same, and `font-stretch` is kept as an alias of `font-width`, could you just say "The keywords supported by the {{cssxref("font-width")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`."

If you don't feel that this is a viable solution, I think you'll need to explain their relationship in some way.

Also, `font-stretch`/`font-width` accepts a percentage as well as keywords. Are these not supported in the font shorthand?

Author: percents are not supported, explained in detail below, but why it says "keywords" here.

Reviewer: Ah, yes, I saw the explanation later on. We are all good on that particular point.

- `<'font-size'>`

>   - : See the {{cssxref("font-size")}} CSS property. Required value.

Reviewer: In other parts of MDN, we mark optional values with the appropriate macro, and not required values.

- `<'line-height'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("line-height")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<'font-family'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-family")}} CSS property. Required value.

- `<system-font-family-name>`
  - : A single keyword representing a system font, including:
    - `caption`

>       - : The system font used for captioned controls (e.g., buttons, drop-downs, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - : The system font used for captioned controls (e.g., buttons and drop-downs).
```

Author: This was kept from the original. I didn't change it b/c i am not sure it's only those two.

Reviewer: I appreciate that, but it looks a bit weird to include both "e.g." and "etc."; you only need one.

Maybe "(buttons, drop-downs, etc.)" would serve the purpose better.

Either way, not that important.

    - `icon`
      - : The system font used to label icons.
    - `menu`
      - : The system font used in menus (e.g., dropdown menus and menu lists).
    - `message-box`
      - : The system font used in dialog boxes.
    - `small-caption`
      - : The system font used for labeling small controls.
    - `status-bar`
      - : The system font used in window status bars.

>     There are several non-standard values are implemented with prefixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There are several non-standard values implemented with prefixes.
```

## Description

> Depending on its value, the `font` property value is either a single keyword representing a system-font-family-name or multiple longhand property value used to set all the different properties of an element's font.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `font` property value is either a single keyword representing a system-font-family-name or multiple longhand property values used to set all the different properties of an element's font.
```

### System font declarations

> If `font` is specified as a `<system-font-family-name>` keyword, the full property value must be set to that single, case-insensitive keyword. Valid values include `caption`, `icon`, `menu`, `message-box`, `small-caption` or `status-bar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `font` is specified as a `<system-font-family-name>` keyword, the full property value must be set to that single, case-insensitive keyword. Valid values include `caption`, `icon`, `menu`, `message-box`, `small-caption`, or `status-bar`.
```

> Browsers also support non-standard prefixed values. Chromium implements `-webkit-control`, `-webkit-small-control`, and `-webkit-mini-control`. Webkit includes these, and adds `-webkit-body`, `-webkit-pictograph`, and `-webkit-ruby-text`, along with several `-apple-system-*` prefixed system font names. Gecko implements `-moz-window`, `-moz-document`, `-moz-desktop`, `-moz-info`, `-moz-dialog`, `-moz-button`, `-moz-pull-down-menu`, `-moz-list`, and `-moz-field`.

Reviewer: Include each browser's prefixed values as a separate bullet in a list, to make the information a bit easier to parse?

Author: good call. done.

Reviewer: Looks great

> The system font, or `<system-font-family-name>`, can only be set with the `font` property. Defining a single keyword value, such as `font: icon`, sets the font's family, size, weight, style, etc. to the values the browser defined for the named system font. These values can all be changed with longhand declarations coming _after_ the `font` declaration. Including any `font` longhand components after the `<system-font-family-name>` keyword within a `font` property value invalidates the declaration. For example, `font: icon small` is invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system font, or `<system-font-family-name>`, can only be set with the `font` property. Defining a single keyword value, such as `font: icon`, sets the font's family, size, weight, style, etc., to the values the browser defines for the named system font. These values can all be changed with longhand declarations placed _after_ the `font` declaration.

Including any `font` longhand components after the `<system-font-family-name>` keyword within a `font` property value invalidates the declaration. For example, `font: icon small` is invalid.
```

If a `<system-font-family-name>` keyword appears anywhere in the value other than as the first component, the keyword is treated as an {{cssxref("ident")}} representing a standard `font-family` name. For example, the declaration `font: small icon` sets the `font-family` to a font named `icon`, a non-system font which may or may not exist. This declaration also sets the `font-size` to `small` and resets all the other shorthand component properties to their initial values.

> ### As a shorthand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Shorthand font declarations
```

font: ultra-condensed small-caps 1.2em Montserrat, Helvetica, sans-serif;

/* system font */
font: caption;
```

### Values

The value is either a shorthand specifying the various font-related properties or a single `<system-font-family-name>` keyword:

- `<'font-style'>` {{optional_inline}}
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-style")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<font-variant-css2>` {{optional_inline}}
  - : Either the `normal` or `small-caps` value of the {{cssxref("font-variant")}} property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<'font-weight'>` {{optional_inline}}
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-weight")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<font-width-css3>` {{optional_inline}}
  - : The keywords supported by the {{cssxref("font-width")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<'font-size'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-size")}} CSS property.
- `<'line-height'>` {{optional_inline}}
  - : See the {{cssxref("line-height")}} CSS property. Defaults to `normal`.
- `<'font-family'>`
  - : See the {{cssxref("font-family")}} CSS property. Must be the last value.

- `<system-font-family-name>`
  - : A single keyword representing a system font, including:
    - `caption`

>       - : The system font used for captioned controls (e.g., buttons, drop-downs, etc.).

Author: ```suggestion
      - : The system font used for captioned controls (buttons, drop-downs, etc.).
```

  - {{cssxref("font-style")}}
  - {{cssxref("font-variant")}}
  - {{cssxref("font-weight")}}
  - {{cssxref("font-width")}}
  - {{cssxref("line-height")}}

> As with any shorthand property, any of the longhand component properties not value that is not specified is set to its initial value, possibly overriding values previously set using non-shorthand properties. In addition, the shorthand resets the following properties to their initial values that can not be set by the shorthand:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with any shorthand property, any of the longhand component properties not specified are set to their initial values, possibly overriding values previously set using non-shorthand properties. In addition, the shorthand resets the following properties to their initial values. The shorthand cannot explicitly set them:
```

- {{cssxref("font-feature-settings")}}
- {{cssxref("font-kerning")}}
- {{cssxref("font-language-override")}}
- {{cssxref("font-optical-sizing")}}
- {{cssxref("font-size-adjust")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-alternates")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-caps")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-east-asian")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-emoji")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-ligatures")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-numeric")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-position")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variation-settings")}}

### Shorthand property order

> The order of some of the longhand values within the shorthand `font` declaration is partially important and must therefore follow a few rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order of some of the longhand values within the shorthand `font` declaration must follow a few rules:
```

- Both the `font-size` and `font-family` components are required (except for [system font declarations](#system_font_declarations)).
- The `font-style`, `font-variant` and `font-weight` components must precede the `font-size` value.
- A `line-height` can only be included if `font-size` is included. If present, the `line-height` must immediately follow the `font-size`, with the two values separated by a forward slash (`/`), for example: `16px / 3`.
- The `font-family` must be the last value specified.

### Components with limited values

For backward compatibility, the valid values of the `font-variant` and `font-width` components do not include all the valid values or the longhand equivalents.

> - The valid values for the `font-variant` component are limited `normal` or `small-caps`.

Reviewer: This is an odd way to structure these bits, with the DL, and it is a bit confusing. It looks like a copy-paste error or something.

How about just using regular bullets, and saying something like:

> The valid values for the `font-variant` component are limited to the two values specified in CSS 2.1: `normal` or `small-caps`...

And then carry on from there.

I'm not convinced that you need to mention the spec component at all, but if you are determined to do so, you could say

> The valid values for the `font-variant` component (specified as `<font-variant-css2>`) are limited to the two values specified in CSS 2.1: `normal` or `small-caps`...

Same suggestion for both.

Author: changed to paragraphs and removes spec mentions

- {{cssxref("font-size-adjust")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-alternates")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-caps")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-east-asian")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-emoji")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-ligatures")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-numeric")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variant-position")}}
- {{cssxref("font-variation-settings")}}

### Shorthand property order

The order of some of the longhand values within the shorthand `font` declaration must follow a few rules:

- Both the `font-size` and `font-family` components are required (except for [system font declarations](#system_font_declarations)).
- The `font-style`, `font-variant` and `font-weight` components must precede the `font-size` value.
- A `line-height` can only be included if `font-size` is included. If present, the `line-height` must immediately follow the `font-size`, with the two values separated by a forward slash (`/`), for example: `16px / 3`.
- The `font-family` must be the last value specified.

### Components with limited values

For backward compatibility, the valid values of the `font-variant` and `font-width` components do not include all the valid values or the longhand equivalents.

> The valid values for the `font-variant` component are limited `normal` or `small-caps`. While no other values are supported, the shorthand `font` declaration resets all the `font-variant-*` longhand properties to `normal`, including {{cssxref("font-variation-settings")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-position")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-emoji")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-caps")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-ligatures")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-numeric")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-east-asian")}}, and {{cssxref("font-variant-alternates")}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The valid values for the `font-variant` component are limited to `normal` or `small-caps`. While no other values are supported, the shorthand `font` declaration resets all the `font-variant-*` longhand properties to `normal`, including {{cssxref("font-variation-settings")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-position")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-emoji")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-caps")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-ligatures")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-numeric")}}, {{cssxref("font-variant-east-asian")}}, and {{cssxref("font-variant-alternates")}}.
```

> The valid values for the `font-width` component are limited to keyword values: `normal`, `ultra-condensed`, `extra-condensed`, `condensed`, `semi-condensed`, `semi-expanded`, `expanded`, `extra-expanded`, `ultra-expanded`. The {{cssxref("font-width")}} longhand property also supports {{cssxref("percentage")}} values, which are not valid within the shorthand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The valid values for the `font-width` component are limited to keyword values: `normal`, `ultra-condensed`, `extra-condensed`, `condensed`, `semi-condensed`, `semi-expanded`, `expanded`, `extra-expanded`, `ultra-expanded`. The {{cssxref("font-width")}} longhand property also supports {{cssxref("percentage")}} values, but they are not valid within the shorthand.
```

I thought a "but" might make it sound slightly more definite/conclusive.

## Examples

### Basic usage

> This example defines the `font` for all {{htmlelement("p")}} elements. We set the `font-size` to `12px` and the `line-height` to `14px`, separating them with a forward slash (`/`). We know which {{cssxref("length")}} refers to each component because of the rule: "If present, the `line-height` must immediately follow the `font-size`, with the two values separated by a forward slash (`/`)". The declaration also sets the `font-family` to `sans-serif`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example defines the `font` for all {{htmlelement("p")}} elements. We set the `font-size` to `12px` and the `line-height` to `14px`, separating them with a forward slash (`/`). The declaration also sets the `font-family` to `sans-serif`.
```

I don't think you need to repeat that here. You said it in the description above.

```css
p {
  font: 12px / 14px sans-serif;
}
```

```html hidden
<p>
  This is a paragraph of sans-serif text. The font-size is small, at just 12px.
  If this text wraps, the line height is pretty tight at 14px, so this may be
  difficult to read.
</p>
```

{{ EmbedLiveSample('basic usage','100%', '100')}}

### Multiple properties

In this example, we set the `font-weight` to `bold`, the `font-style` to `italic`, the `font-size` to `large`, the `line-height` to `1.6`, and the `font-family` to `serif`.

```css
p {
  font: bold italic large / 1.6 serif;
}
```

```html hidden
<p>
  In this example, we set the font weight to bold, the font style to italic, the
  font size to large, the line height to 1.6, and the font family to serif.
</p>
```

{{ EmbedLiveSample(' Multiple properties','100%', '100')}}

### System font

> This example demonstrates using the `font` property to set a system font. We set the paragraph's font to have the same `font-family`, `line-height`, `font-size`, etc., as the status bar of the window, then we set the `line-height` to `1.6`.

Reviewer: It might not be immediately obvious to all readers what the status bar of the window is. When I saw the example, I immediately thought, "Oh, why is it a link instead of a paragraph?" why has it got a weird URL?

It might be good to clarify beforehand what the intention is here, or try to do something a bit less convoluted.

Author: Fair! I rewrote the text around all the example components to explain the link being bad so we disabled it with javascript

```css
p {
  font: 12px / 14px sans-serif;
}
```

```html hidden
<p>
  This is a paragraph of sans-serif text. The font-size is small, at just 12px.
  If this text wraps, the line height is pretty tight at 14px, so this may be
  difficult to read.
</p>
```

{{EmbedLiveSample('basic usage','100%', '100')}}

### Multiple properties

In this example, we set the `font-weight` to `bold`, the `font-style` to `italic`, the `font-size` to `large`, the `line-height` to `1.6`, and the `font-family` to `serif`.

```css
p {
  font: bold italic large / 1.6 serif;
}
```

```html hidden
<p>
  In this example, we set the font weight to bold, the font style to italic, the
  font size to large, the line height to 1.6, and the font family to serif.
</p>
```

{{EmbedLiveSample('Multiple properties','100%', '100')}}

### System font

This example demonstrates using the `font` property to set a system font.

#### CSS

We set the paragraph's font to have the same `font-family`, `line-height`, `font-size`, etc., as the status bar of the window, then we set the `line-height` to `1.6`.

```css
p {
  font: status-bar;
  line-height: 1.6;
}
```

#### HTML

> Our HTML includes a paragraph ({{htmlelement("p")}}) containing a link ({{htmlelement("a")}}) with a convoluted [`href`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/a#href) attribute value. When you hover over or focus on the rendered link, your browser's status bar should display the value of this `href` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our HTML includes a paragraph ({{htmlelement("p")}}) containing a link ({{htmlelement("a")}}) with a convoluted [`href`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/a#href) attribute value. When you hover or focus the rendered link, your browser's status bar should display the value of the `href` attribute.
```

```html
<p>
  <a
    href="/%20The%20font%20should%20be%20the%20same%20
family%20and%20size%20and%20the%20text%20in%20the%20example."
    >Hover or focus this text. The font should be the same family and size and
    the text in your status bar.</a
  >
</p>
```

#### JavaScript

As the URL in our HTML link is not good practice, we include a script that prevents the document from redirecting to a non-existent page when the link is clicked.

```js

> const a = document.querySelector("a");

Reviewer: Maybe change `a` to something like `aElem` so that it is easier to distinguish it from `e` at a glance.

> a.addEventListener("click", function (e) {

Author: ```suggestion
const aElem = document.querySelector("a");
aElem.addEventListener("click", function (e) {
```

  e.preventDefault();
  return false;
});
```

#### Result

{{EmbedLiveSample('System font','100%', '100')}}

> Hover or focus the link, then look at your status bar. The font should be the same family and size and the text in your status bar at the bottom of your browser window..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hover or focus the link. The font should be the same family and size as the text in your status bar at the bottom of your browser window.
```

Fixing a couple of typos, plus I don't think we need the "status bar" repetition. This is pretty clear now.
